README.md, before:

# splurge-sql-runner
Splurge Python SQL Runner

A Python utility for executing SQL files against databases with support for multiple statements, comments, and pretty-printed results.

## Features

- Execute SQL files with multiple statements
- Support for various database backends (SQLite, PostgreSQL, MySQL, etc.)
- Automatic comment removal and statement parsing
- Pretty-printed results with tabulated output
- Batch processing of multiple files
- Transaction support with rollback on errors
- Clean CLI interface with comprehensive error handling
- Security validation for database URLs and file operations
- Comprehensive error handling with circuit breaker patterns
- Configuration management with JSON-based config files
- Advanced logging with multiple output formats
- Resilience patterns for production deployments

## Installation

```bash
pip install splurge-sql-runner
```

## CLI Usage

The main interface is through the command-line tool:

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Execute a single SQL file
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql"

# Execute multiple SQL files using a pattern
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -p "*.sql"

# With verbose output
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql" -v

# Using the installed script (after pip install)
splurge-sql-runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql"
```

### Command Line Options

- `-c, --connection`: Database connection string (required)
  - SQLite: `sqlite:///database.db`
  - PostgreSQL: `postgresql://user:pass@localhost/db`
  - MySQL: `mysql://user:pass@localhost/db`
  
- `-f, --file`: Single SQL file to execute
  
- `-p, --pattern`: File pattern to match multiple SQL files (e.g., "*.sql")
  
- `-v, --verbose`: Enable verbose output
  
- `--debug`: Enable SQLAlchemy debug mode

- `--disable-security`: Disable security validation (not recommended for production)

- `--max-file-size`: Maximum file size in MB (default: 10)

- `--max-statements`: Maximum statements per file (default: 100)

### Examples

```bash
# SQLite example
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///test.db" -f "setup.sql"

# PostgreSQL example
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "postgresql://user:pass@localhost/mydb" -p "migrations/*.sql"

# MySQL example with verbose output
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "mysql://user:pass@localhost/mydb" -f "data.sql" -v

# Process all SQL files in current directory
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -p "*.sql"

# With security validation disabled (not recommended)
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql" --disable-security
```

## Programmatic Usage

### Basic Usage

```python
from splurge_sql_runner.database.engines import UnifiedDatabaseEngine
from splurge_sql_runner.config.security_config import SecurityConfig

# Initialize the database engine
engine = UnifiedDatabaseEngine("sqlite:///database.db")

# Create security configuration
security_config = SecurityConfig(
    max_file_size_mb=10,
    max_statements_per_file=100
)

# Execute SQL with security validation
try:
    results = engine.execute_file("script.sql", security_config)
    for result in results:
        print(f"Statement executed: {result.success}")
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Execution failed: {e}")

engine.shutdown()
```

### Advanced Usage with New Architecture

```python
from splurge_sql_runner.config import ConfigManager, AppConfig
from splurge_sql_runner.database import SqlRepository, UnifiedDatabaseEngine
from splurge_sql_runner.errors import ErrorHandler, CircuitBreakerConfig

# Load configuration
config_manager = ConfigManager("config.json")
config = config_manager.load_config()

# Create database repository with error handling
error_handler = ErrorHandler(
    circuit_breaker_config=CircuitBreakerConfig(
        failure_threshold=5,
        recovery_timeout=60
    )
)

repository = SqlRepository(config)

# Execute SQL with resilience
try:
    results = repository.execute_batch("script.sql", config)
    for result in results:
        print(f"Statement executed: {result.success}")
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Execution failed: {e}")
```



## Configuration

The library supports JSON-based configuration files for advanced usage:

```json
{
    "database": {
        "url": "sqlite:///database.db",
        "type": "sqlite",
        "connection": {
            "timeout": 30,
            "max_connections": 5
        },
        "pool": {
            "size": 5,
            "max_overflow": 0,
            "recycle_time": 3600
        }
    },
    "security": {
        "enable_validation": true,
        "max_file_size_mb": 10,
        "max_statements_per_file": 100
    },
    "logging": {
        "level": "INFO",
        "format": "TEXT",
        "enable_console": true,
        "enable_file": false
    }
}
```

## SQL File Format

The tool supports SQL files with:
- Multiple statements separated by semicolons
- Single-line comments (`-- comment`)
- Multi-line comments (`/* comment */`)
- Comments within string literals are preserved

Example SQL file:
```sql
-- Create table
CREATE TABLE users (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL
);

-- Insert data
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ('John');
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ('Jane');

-- Query data
SELECT * FROM users;
```

## Output Format

The CLI provides formatted output showing:
- File being processed
- Each statement executed
- Results in tabulated format for SELECT queries
- Success/error status for each statement
- Summary of files processed

## Error Handling

- Individual statement errors don't stop the entire batch
- Failed statements are reported with error details
- Database connections are properly cleaned up
- Exit codes indicate success/failure
- Circuit breaker patterns for handling repeated failures
- Retry strategies with exponential backoff
- Comprehensive error context and recovery mechanisms
- Security validation with configurable thresholds

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

## Development

### Installation for Development

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/jim-schilling/splurge-sql-runner.git
cd splurge-sql-runner

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest -x -v

# Run linting
flake8 splurge_sql_runner/
black splurge_sql_runner/
mypy splurge_sql_runner/
```

## Changelog

### 2025.2.0 (08-10-2025)

- **Breaking Changes**: `DbEngine` class has been removed entirely
- **New**: `UnifiedDatabaseEngine` is the only database engine for programmatic usage
- **New**: Centralized configuration constants in `splurge_sql_runner.config.constants`
- **Improved**: Security validation now uses centralized `SecurityConfig` from `splurge_sql_runner.config.security_config`
- **Code Quality**: Eliminated code duplication across the codebase

### Initial Commit

Commit message:

Add debug configuration script and update version to 2025.3.0
- Introduced `debug_config.py` for testing configuration loading with detailed debug output.
- Updated `pyproject.toml` to version 2025.3.0.
- Revised `README.md` to clarify programmatic usage and emphasize CLI interface benefits.
- Enhanced documentation and examples for better user guidance.
- Removed deprecated connection pool and repository classes to streamline the codebase.

README.md, after:

# splurge-sql-runner
Splurge Python SQL Runner

A Python utility for executing SQL files against databases with support for multiple statements, comments, and pretty-printed results.

## Features

- Execute SQL files with multiple statements
- Support for various database backends (SQLite, PostgreSQL, MySQL, etc.)
- Automatic comment removal and statement parsing
- Pretty-printed results with tabulated output
- Batch processing of multiple files
- Batch SQL execution with error handling
- Clean CLI interface with comprehensive error handling
- Security validation for database URLs and file operations
- Comprehensive error handling with circuit breaker patterns
- Configuration management with JSON-based config files
- Advanced logging with multiple output formats
- Resilience patterns for production deployments

## Installation

```bash
pip install splurge-sql-runner
```

## CLI Usage

The main interface is through the command-line tool:

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Execute a single SQL file
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql"

# Execute multiple SQL files using a pattern
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -p "*.sql"

# With verbose output
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql" -v

# Using the installed script (after pip install)
splurge-sql-runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql"
```

### Command Line Options

- `-c, --connection`: Database connection string (required)
  - SQLite: `sqlite:///database.db`
  - PostgreSQL: `postgresql://user:pass@localhost/db`
  - MySQL: `mysql://user:pass@localhost/db`
  
- `-f, --file`: Single SQL file to execute
  
- `-p, --pattern`: File pattern to match multiple SQL files (e.g., "*.sql")
  
- `-v, --verbose`: Enable verbose output
  
- `--debug`: Enable SQLAlchemy debug mode

- `--disable-security`: Disable security validation (not recommended for production)

- `--max-file-size`: Maximum file size in MB (default: 10)

- `--max-statements`: Maximum statements per file (default: 100)

### Examples

```bash
# SQLite example
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///test.db" -f "setup.sql"

# PostgreSQL example
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "postgresql://user:pass@localhost/mydb" -p "migrations/*.sql"

# MySQL example with verbose output
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "mysql://user:pass@localhost/mydb" -f "data.sql" -v

# Process all SQL files in current directory
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -p "*.sql"

# With security validation disabled (not recommended)
python -m splurge_sql_runner -c "sqlite:///database.db" -f "script.sql" --disable-security
```

## Programmatic Usage

**Note**: This library is primarily designed to be used via the CLI interface. The programmatic API is provided for advanced use cases and integration scenarios, but the CLI offers the most comprehensive features and best user experience.

### Basic Usage

```python
from splurge_sql_runner.database.engines import UnifiedDatabaseEngine
from splurge_sql_runner.config.security_config import SecurityConfig

# Initialize the database engine
engine = UnifiedDatabaseEngine("sqlite:///database.db")

# Create security configuration
security_config = SecurityConfig(
    max_file_size_mb=10,
    max_statements_per_file=100
)

# Execute SQL with security validation
try:
    results = engine.execute_file("script.sql", security_config)
    for result in results:
        print(f"Statement executed: {result.success}")
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Execution failed: {e}")

engine.shutdown()
```

### Advanced Usage

```python
from splurge_sql_runner.config import ConfigManager, AppConfig
from splurge_sql_runner.database import UnifiedDatabaseEngine

# Load configuration
config_manager = ConfigManager("config.json")
config = config_manager.load_config()

# Create database engine
engine = UnifiedDatabaseEngine(config.database)

# Execute SQL batch
try:
    results = engine.batch("SELECT 1; INSERT INTO test VALUES (1);")
    for result in results:
        print(f"Statement type: {result['statement_type']}")
        if result['statement_type'] == 'fetch':
            print(f"Rows returned: {result['row_count']}")
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Execution failed: {e}")

engine.close()
```



## Configuration

The library supports JSON-based configuration files for advanced usage:

```json
{
    "database": {
        "url": "sqlite:///database.db",
        "connection": {
            "timeout": 30
        },
        "enable_debug": false
    },
    "security": {
        "enable_validation": true,
        "max_file_size_mb": 10,
        "max_statements_per_file": 100
    },
    "logging": {
        "level": "INFO",
        "format": "TEXT",
        "enable_console": true,
        "enable_file": false
    }
}
```

## SQL File Format

The tool supports SQL files with:
- Multiple statements separated by semicolons
- Single-line comments (`-- comment`)
- Multi-line comments (`/* comment */`)
- Comments within string literals are preserved

Example SQL file:
```sql
-- Create table
CREATE TABLE users (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL
);

-- Insert data
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ('John');
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ('Jane');

-- Query data
SELECT * FROM users;
```

## Output Format

The CLI provides formatted output showing:
- File being processed
- Each statement executed
- Results in tabulated format for SELECT queries
- Success/error status for each statement
- Summary of files processed

## Error Handling

- Individual statement errors don't stop the entire batch
- Failed statements are reported with error details
- Database connections are properly cleaned up
- Exit codes indicate success/failure
- Circuit breaker patterns for handling repeated failures
- Retry strategies with exponential backoff
- Comprehensive error context and recovery mechanisms
- Security validation with configurable thresholds

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

## Development

### Installation for Development

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/jim-schilling/splurge-sql-runner.git
cd splurge-sql-runner

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest -x -v

# Run linting
flake8 splurge_sql_runner/
black splurge_sql_runner/
mypy splurge_sql_runner/
```

## Changelog

### 2025.3.0 (08-11-2025)

- **Documentation**: Updated Programmatic Usage section to clarify that the library is primarily designed for CLI usage
- **Documentation**: Added note explaining that programmatic API is for advanced use cases and integration scenarios
- **Documentation**: Emphasized that CLI offers the most comprehensive features and best user experience
- **Breaking Changes**: `DbEngine` class has been removed entirely
- **New**: `UnifiedDatabaseEngine` is the only database engine for programmatic usage
- **New**: Centralized configuration constants in `splurge_sql_runner.config.constants`
- **Improved**: Security validation now uses centralized `SecurityConfig` from `splurge_sql_runner.config.security_config`
- **Code Quality**: Eliminated code duplication across the codebase
- **Breaking Changes**: Environment variables now use `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_` prefix instead of `JPY_`
  - `JPY_DB_URL` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_DB_URL`
  - `JPY_DB_TIMEOUT` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_DB_TIMEOUT`
  - `JPY_SECURITY_ENABLED` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_SECURITY_ENABLED`
  - `JPY_MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB`
  - `JPY_MAX_STATEMENTS_PER_FILE` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_MAX_STATEMENTS_PER_FILE`
  - `JPY_VERBOSE` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_VERBOSE`
  - `JPY_LOG_LEVEL` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_LOG_LEVEL`
  - `JPY_LOG_FORMAT` → `SPLURGE_SQL_RUNNER_LOG_FORMAT`
